since 2009 the world has been stuck on a
single narrative around a coming global
food crisis and what we need to do to
avoid it how do we feed nine billion
people by 2050 every conference podcast
and dialogue around global food security
starts with this question and goes on to
answer it by saying we need to produce
70 percent more food
the 2015 narrative started to evolve
shortly after global food prices hit
all-time highs in 2008 people were
suffering and struggling governments and
world leaders needed to show us that
they were paying attention and were
working to solve it
the thing is 2050 is so far into the
future that we can't even relate to it
and more importantly if we keep doing
what we're doing it's going to hit us a
lot sooner than that I believe we need
to ask a different question the answer
to that question needs to be framed
differently if we can reframe the old
narrative and replace it with new
numbers that tell us a more complete
picture numbers that everyone can
understand and relate to we can avoid
the crisis altogether I was a
commodities trader in my past life and
one of the things that I learned trading
is that every market has a tipping point
the point at which change occurs so
rapidly that it impacts the world and
things change forever think of the last
financial crisis or the dot-com crash so
here's my concern we could have a
tipping point in global food and
agriculture
surging demand surpasses the the
agricultural system structural capacity
to produce food this means at this point
supply can no longer keep up with demand
despite exploding prices and less we can
commit to some type of structural change
this time around it won't be about stock
markets and money it's about people
people could starve and governments may
fall this question of at what point does
supply struggle to keep up with surging
demand is one that started off as an
interest for me while I was trading and
became an absolute obsession
it went from interest to obsession when
I realized through my research how
broken the system was and how very
little data was being used to make such
critical decisions that's the point I
decided to walk away from a career on
Wall Street and start an entrepreneurial
journey to start grow intelligence at
grow we focus on bringing this data and
doing the work to make it actionable to
empower decision-makers at every level
but doing this work we also realize that
the world not just world leaders but
businesses and citizens like every
single person in this room lacked an
actionable guide on how we can avoid a
coming global food security crisis and
so we built a model leveraging the
petabytes of data we sit on and we
solved for the tipping point now no one
knows we've been working on this problem
and this is the first time that I'm
sharing what we discovered we discovered
that the tipping point is actually a
decade from now we discovered that the
world will be short 214 trillion
calories by 2027 the world is not in a
position to fill this gap now you
notice that the way I'm framing this is
different from how I started and that's
intentional because until now this
problem has been quantified using math
think kilograms tonnes hectare grams
whatever your unit of choices in mass
why do we talk about food in terms of
weight because it's easy we can look at
a photograph and determine tonnage on a
ship by using a simple pocket calculator
we can weight trucks airplanes and ox
carts but what we care about in food is
nutritional value not all foods are
created equal even if they weigh the
same this I learned firsthand when I
moved from Ethiopia to the US for
university upon my return back home my
father who was so excited to see me
greeted me by asking why I was fat now
turns out turns out that eating
approximately the same amount of food as
I did in Ethiopia but in America had
actually meant a certain fullness to my
figure this is why we should care about
calories not about mass it is calories
which sustain us so 214 trillion
calories is a very large number and not
even the most dedicated of us think in
the hundreds of trillions of calories so
let me break this down differently an
alternative way to think about this is
to think about it in big macs 214
trillion calories a single Big Mac has
563 calories that means the world will
be short 379 billion Big Macs in 2027
that is more Big Macs than McDonald's
has ever produced so how did we get to
these numbers in the first place they're
not made up this map shows you where the
world was forty years ago
it shows you net calorie gaps in every
country in the world now simply put this
is just calories consumed in that
country
- calories produced in that same country
this is not a statement on malnutrition
or anything else it's simply saying how
many calories are produced in a single
consumed in a single year - how many are
produced blue countries are net calorie
exporters or self-sufficient they have
some in storage for a rainy day red
countries are net calorie importers the
deeper the brighter the red the more
you're importing 40 years ago such few
countries were net exporters of calories
I could count them with one hand most of
the African continent Europe most of
Asia South America excluding Argentina
were all net importers of calories and
what's surprising is that China used to
actually be food self-sufficient India
was a big net importer of calories forty
years later this is today you can see
the drastic transformation that's
occurred in the world Brazil has emerged
as an agricultural powerhouse Europe is
dominant in global agriculture India has
actually flipped from red to blue it's
become food self-sufficient and China
went from that light blue to the
brightest red you see on this map how do
we get here what happened so this chart
shows you India and Africa blue line is
India red line is Africa how is it the
two regions that started off so
similarly in such similar trajectories
take such different paths India had a
green revolution not a single African
country had a green revolution the net
outcome India's food self-sufficient and
in the past decade has actually been
exporting calories the African continent
now imports over 300 trillion calories a
year then he had to China the Green Line
remember the switch from the blue to the
bright red what happened and when did it
happen
China seemed to be on a very similar
path to India until the start of the
21st century where it's suddenly flipped
a young and growing population combined
with significant economic growth made
its mark with a big bang and no one in
the markets saw it coming this flip with
everything to global agricultural
markets luckily now South America was
starting to boom at the same time as
China's rise and so therefore supply and
demand are still somewhat balanced so
the question becomes where do we go from
here
oddly enough it's not a new story except
this time it's not just a story of China
it's a continuation of China an
amplification of Africa and a paradigm
shift in India by 2023 Africa's
population is forecasted to overtake
that of India's and China's by 2023
these three regions combined will make
up over half the world's population this
crossover point starts to present really
interesting challenges for global food
security and a few years later were hit
hard with that reality what does the
world look like in ten years so far as I
mentioned India has been food
self-sufficient most forecasters predict
that this will continue we disagree
India will become will soon become a net
importer of calories this will be driven
both by the fact that demand is growing
from a population growth standpoint plus
economic growth they'll be driven by
both and even if you have optimistic
assumptions around production growth it
will make that slight flip that slight
flip can have huge implications next
Africa will continue to be a net
importer of calories again driven by
population growth and economic growth
this again is assuming optimistic
production growth Hassan
then China where population is
flattening out calorie consumption will
explode because the types of calories
consumed are also starting to be higher
calorie content foods and so therefore
these three regions combined resort to
present a really interesting challenge
for the world until now calorie
countries with calorie deficits have
been able to meet these deficits by
importing from surplus regions by
surplus regions I'm talking about North
America South America and Europe this
line chart over here shows you the
growths in the projected growth over the
next decade of production from North
America South American Europe what it
doesn't show you is that most of this
growth is actually going to come from
South America and most of this growth is
going to come at the huge cost of
deforestation and so when you look at
the combined demand increase coming from
India China and the African continent
and look at it versus the combined
increase in production coming from India
China the African continent North
America South America and Europe you are
left with a two hundred fourteen
trillion calorie deficit one we can't
produce and this by the way is actually
assuming we take all the extra calories
produced in North America South America
and Europe and export them solely to
India China and Africa what I just
presented to you is a vision of an
impossible world we can do something to
change that we can change consumption
patterns we can reduce food waste or we
can make a bold commitment to increasing
yields exponentially now I'm not going
to go into discussing changing
consumption patterns or reducing food
waste because those conversations have
been going on for some time now nothing
has happened nothing has happened
because those arguments ask the surplus
regions to change their behavior on
behalf of deficit regions
waiting for others to change their
behavior on your behalf for your
survival is a terrible idea
it's unproductive so I'd like to suggest
an alternative that comes from the red
regions China India Africa China is
constrained in terms of how much more
land it actually has available for
agriculture and it has massive water
resource availability issues so the
answer really lies in India and in
Africa India has some upside in terms of
potential yield increases now this is
the gap between its current yield and
the theoretical maximum yield it can
achieve it has some unfarmed
arable land remaining but not much India
is quite land constrained now the
African continent on the other hand has
vast amounts of arable land remaining
and significant upside potential and
yields somewhat simplified picture here
but if you look at sub-saharan African
yields in corn today they are where
North American yields were in 1940 we
don't have 70 plus years to figure this
out so it means we need to try something
new and we need to try something
different the solution starts with
reforms we need to reform and
commercialize the agricultural
industries in Africa and in India now by
commercialization commercialization is
not about commercial farming alone
commercialization is about leveraging
data to craft better policies to improve
infrastructure to lower the
transportation costs and to completely
reform banking and insurance industries
commercialization is about taking
agriculture from too risky and endeavour
to one more fortunes can be made
: is not about just farmers
commercialization is about the entire
agricultural system but
commercialization also means confronting
the fact that
can no longer place the burden of growth
on small-scale farmers alone and
accepting that commercial farms in the
introduction of commercial farms could
provide certain economies of scale that
even small-scale farmers can leverage it
is not about small-scale farming or a
commercial agriculture or a big
agriculture we can create the first
successful models of the coexistence and
success of small-scale farming alongside
commercial agriculture this is because
for the first time ever the most
critical tool for success in the
industry data and knowledge is becoming
cheaper by the day and very soon it
won't matter how much money you have or
how big you are to make optimal
decisions and maximize probability of
success in reaching your intended goal
companies like grow are working really
really hard to make this a reality so if
we can commit to this new bold
initiative to this new bold to change
not only can we solve the two hundred
fourteen trillion gap that I talked
about but we can actually set the world
on a whole new path India can remain
food self-sufficient and Africa can
emerge as the world's next dark blue
region the new question is how do we
produce two hundred fourteen trillion
calories to feed eight point three
billion people by 2027
we have the solution we just need to act
on it thank you
[Applause]